# Ansible Doc

- [Ansible Doc](#ansible-doc)
  - [Install Ansible](#install-ansible)
  - [Integrating Ansible into Azure Cloud Shell](#integrating-ansible-into-azure-cloud-shell)
  - [Ansible artifacts](#ansible-artifacts)
  - [Configuring Ansible](#configuring-ansible)
  - [Creating an inventory for targeting Ansible hosts](#creating-an-inventory-for-targeting-ansible-hosts)
  - [The inventory file](#the-inventory-file)
  - [Configuring hosts in the inventory](#configuring-hosts-in-the-inventory)
    - [Testing the inventory](#testing-the-inventory)
  - [Writing the first playbook](#writing-the-first-playbook)
    - [Understanding Ansible Modules](#understanding-ansible-modules)
    - [Improving your playbook with roles](#improving-your-playbook-with-roles)
  - [Executing Ansible](#executing-ansible)
    - [Using the preview or dry run option](#using-the-preview-or-dry-run-option)
    - [Increasing the log level output](#increasing-the-log-level-output)
  - [Protecting data with Ansible Vault](#protecting-data-with-ansible-vault)
    - [Using variables in Ansible for better configuration](#using-variables-in-ansible-for-better-configuration)
    - [Protecting sensitive data with Ansible Vault](#protecting-sensitive-data-with-ansible-vault)
  - [Using a dynamic inventory for Azure infrastructure](#using-a-dynamic-inventory-for-azure-infrastructure)

## Install Ansible

Ansible is not multiplatform and can therefore only be installed on the following OSes:

- Red Hat
- Debian
- CentOS
- macOS

To install Ansible on Ubuntu use the following script:

```bash

sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install software-properties-common
sudo apt-add-repository --yes --update ppa:ansible/ansible
sudo apt-get install ansible

```

Ansible cannot be installed on Windows but you can use WSL for that.
If you have Visual Studio Code with the remote development extension installed
you can install ansible with Visual Studio Code.

To check if Ansible is installed run the following script:

```bash
ansible --version
```

To display all usable Ansible command run this script:

```bash
ansible --help
```

## Integrating Ansible into Azure Cloud Shell

Start an Azure Cloud Shell by navigating to [Azure Cloud Shell](https://shell.azure.com)
and check the installation of ansible with the following command:

```bash
ansible --help
```

## Ansible artifacts

If you will use Ansible you need several main artifacts:

- The hosts: the target systems that Ansible will configure. This can also be localhost
- The inventory: This is an INI or YAML file that contains the list of target hosts on which Ansible
will perform configuration actions. The inventory can also be script based. This is the case if you use a dynamic
inventory.
- The playbook: This is the Ansible configuration script that will be executed to configure hosts.

## Configuring Ansible

The default configuration of Ansible is stored in /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg. This Ansible configuration file
is already filled with a sample configuration which can be changed by the user at any time.

We can also view the ansible.cfg by using the following command:

```bash
ansible-config view
```

## Creating an inventory for targeting Ansible hosts

This is a list of all hosts which are configured by Ansible. There are two types of invetories:

- Static inventory: Hosts are listed in a text file in INI or YAML format. This is the basic mode of Ansible
inventory. That static inventory can only be used if we know the host addresses.
- Dynamic inventory: The list of hosts is dynamically generated by an external script (for example, with a Python script).
The dynamic inventory is used in case we do not have the addresses of the hosts.

## The inventory file

For Ansible to configure hosts when running the playbook, it needs to have a file that contains the list of hosts,
that is, the list of IP or FQDN addresses of the target machines. This list of hosts is noted in a static file called the
inventory file.

Ansible creates a sample inventory file in /etc/ansible/hosts but we can create our own inventory file and place It
where ever we like.

So let's create a folder called devopsansible with this script:

```bash
mkdir devopsansible
cd devopsansible
```

Create a file called myinventory with this script:

```bash
touch myinventory
```

now we put localhost into the file.

When Ansible is executed based on this inventory, It will execute all of the requested actions (playbooks) on all hosts
mentioned in this inventory.

In a bigger environment the same Ansible code contains the configuration action performed for all of the VMs of an application.
Since these VMs have different role within the application we must divide our inventory to properly seperate the VMs by functional roles.

To group VMs by roles in the inventory we have to create groups in the inventory file. A group is written inside []. A sample inventory
can look like this:

```bash

[webserver]
server1

[database]
server2

```

## Configuring hosts in the inventory

To tell Ansible how to communicate with the hosts in the inventory file you can override the following variables:

- ansible_user: The user who connects to the remote host
- ansible_port: The port where ansible needs to connect to
- ansible_host: The alias of the host
- ansible_connection: This is the type of connection to the remote host. and can be Paramiko, SSH or local
- ansible_private_key_file: This is the private key used to connect to the remote host.

So a sample inventory file with that variables can look like this:

```bash
[webserver]
server1 ansible_host=192.168.0.2 ansible_port=2222

[database]
server2 ansible_host=192.168.0.3 ansible_port=2222 ansible_user=admin
```

### Testing the inventory

we can test the following inventory with this line of code:

```bash
ansible -i myinventory all -u constantinhager -m ping
```

- -i: the path of the inventory file.
- -u: the name of the remote user.
- -m: the command to execute.

If we want to test the ansible connection only on a specific group you can execute the following command:

```bash
ansible -i myinventory webserver -u constantinhager -m ping
```

## Writing the first playbook

The code of a playbook is written in yaml. The Ansible playbook is, therefore, a sequence of actions that are encoded
in Ansible modules.

### Understanding Ansible Modules

The complete list of built in Ansible modules is available here: [Ansible modules list](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/list_of_all_modules.html)

### Improving your playbook with roles

If you have a repetitive task you need to encapsulate the task into an Ansible module. To do that we need to create a folder called "role"
that can be used by several playbooks.

A sample folder structure could look like this:

Root
    inventory
    Playbook.yml
    roles
      nginx
        tasks
          main.yml

We can write our own Ansible module or use Ansible galaxy [Ansible Galaxy](https://galaxy.ansible.com), where we can download the
roles from the Ansible community.

## Executing Ansible

To run an Ansible playbook execute the following command:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i inventory playbook.yml
```

Parameters:
 -i : the inventory file path
 playbook.yml: the path of the Ansible playbook to execute.

If you execute an Ansible playbook the following sequence will be executed:

- Gathering facts: Ansible checks that the hosts are reachable.
- The tasks playbook is executed on hosts.
- Play Recap: This is the status of the changes that were executed on each host; the value of this status can be as follows:

| State       | Explanation                                                                        |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ok          | This is the number of playbook tasks that have been correctly applied to the host. |
| changed     | This is the number of changes applied                                              |
| unreachable | The host is unreachable                                                            |
| failed      | Execution failed on this host.                                                     |

If an existing Ansible playbook needs to be modified and is executed again not the complete Ansible
playbook is executed. Only changes of the Ansible playbook are executed.

We can also add some useful option to this command to provide the following:

- A preview of Ansible changes before applying the changes
- More logs in the execution output.

### Using the preview or dry run option

To check if the steps in a playbook are correct we can preview the changes that
we make with the steps. To do that we use the --check parameter in the ansible-playbook command

```bash
ansible-playbook -i inventory playbook.yml --check
```

With this parameter no changes to the hosts are made but the preview shows what changes
could have been made by the Ansible playbook.

### Increasing the log level output

There are three log levels in Ansible they are listed below

| Log Level | Explanation                                           |
| --------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| -v        | basic verbose mode                                    |
| -vvv      | verbose mode with more outputs                        |
| -vvvv     | verbose mode and the connection debugging information |

The following command will display basic verbose mode

```bash
ansible-playbook -i inventory playbook.yml -v
```

The complete documentation on the ansible-playbook command is available here:
[ansible-playbook documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/2.4/ansible-playbook.html)

## Protecting data with Ansible Vault

In Ansible you can make your playbooks dynamic by passing variables to them. Sometimes
variables contain sensitive information. We need to protect this sensitive information.
This can be for example a SQL Server Connection String.

### Using variables in Ansible for better configuration

If you deploy IaC you often have two parts

- the description of the infrastructure
- the differentiation from one environment to the other.

the differentiation part in Ansible is done with variables. Ansible has a whole system
that allows us to inject variables into playbooks.

We added a role called mysql where we have the following variables:

- packages
- mysql_user
- mysql_password

The tasks of this role are as follows:

- Updating packages
- Installing the MySQL Server and the Python MySQL packages
- Create a MySQL user

the variables mysql_user and mysql_password can be dynamic. It depends on your environment.

To define these variables. The first step is to create a folder in our module called "group_vars", which
will contain all of the values of variables for each group defined in our inventory.

So for example if we need to create variable for the inventory section database we need to create a folder database
in group_vars. In this folder there needs to be a main.yml file, where we define the variables.

As we can see we provide the mysql_password in clear text. This raises security issues.

For this we can use Ansible Vault.

### Protecting sensitive data with Ansible Vault

We can encrypt and decrypt sensitive information on the fly with Ansible Vault.

To encrypt for example the group_vars/database/main.yml you have to execute the following line:

```bash
ansible-vault encrypt group_vars/database/main.yml
```

Ansible Vault asks you for a password and displays the status of the encryption.

If you now open the file the content is encrypted.

If you want to make any changes to the file you need to decrypt the file first
by running this command:

```bash
ansible-vault decrypt group_vars/database/main.yml
```

Ansible Vault will ask you for the encryption password and will decrypt the file, so It becomes
readable again.

If you use Ansible in a pipeline scenario, it is preferable to store the password in a file in a protected
location, fore example, in the ~/.vault_pass.txt file.

If we have that file we can decrypt the Ansible variables file with the parameter --vault-password-file like this:

```bash
ansible-vault encrypt group_vars/database/main.yml --vault-password-file ~/.vault_pass.txt
```

Now that the file is encrypted and the data is protected, we will run Ansible with the following commands:

In interactive mode, we will run the following:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i inventory playbook.yml --ask-vaul-pass
```

In the pipeline scenario we can add the --vault-password-file parameter with the path of the file that contains the
password to decrypt the data:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i inventory playbook.yml --vault-password-file ~/.vault-pass.txt
```

## Using a dynamic inventory for Azure infrastructure

Ansible completely relies on the inventory file for distributing the Ansible playbooks. If we have an environment
that is static we only need to create the inventory file once. But if we have an environment that is constantly changing
it becomes very challenging to maintain the inventory file. That is the reason why there are inventory scripts.

They are mostly provided by cloud vendors. We can even write our own inventory scripts in Python.

In this section we will see how to set up a dynamic inventory of Azure VMs.

1. Enable Ansible to access Azure resources. We again need an Azure service principal for that.
   create the following environment variables:

   ```bash
   export AZURE_SUBSCRIPTION_ID=<subscription_id>
   export AZURE_CLIENT_ID=<client ID>
   export AZURE_SECRET=<client Secret>
   export AZURE_TENANT=<tenant ID>
   ```
2. Then to be able to generate an inventory with group and tho filter VMs, it is necessarey to add Tags to the VMs.
   Tags can be addes using Terraform and az cls command or an Azure PowerShell script.

   Example of and az cli script:

   ```bash
   az resource tag --tags role=webserver -n centosnginx -g NGinx --resource-type "Microsoft.Compute/virtualMachines"
   ```

   Example of a PowerShell script:

   ```powershell
   $tags = (Get-AzResource -ResourceGroupName Workshop -Name DC2).Tags

   if($tags -eq $null)
   {
     $tag = @{Role = "webserver"}
     $splat = @{
       ResourcegroupName = "NGinx"
       ResourceName = "centosnginx"
       ResourceType = "Microsoft.Compute/virtualMachines"
       Tag = $tag
       Force = $true
     }

     Set-AzResource @splat
   }
   else
   {
     $tags.add("Role", "webserver")

     $splat = @{
       ResourcegroupName = "NGinx"
       ResourceName = "centosnginx"
       ResourceType = "Microsoft.Compute/virtualMachines"
       Tag = $tags
       Force = $true
     }

     Set-AzResource @splat
   }
   ```

3. Install the Python Azure SDK on the machine that runs Ansible with the following
   command:

   ```python
   pip install azure
   ```

   Create a folder in the AnsibleModule root called inventories

   Download the Python inventory script from this site [azure_rm.py](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ansible/ansible/devel/contrib/inventory/azure_rm.py)

   After that download also the inventory configuration file from this site [azure_rm.ini](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ansible/ansible/devel/contrib/inventory/azure_rm.ini)

   Change the follwing lines in the azure_rm.ini file:

   - group_by_resource_group=no
   - group_by_location=no
   - group_by_security_group=no
   - group_by_os_family=no
   - group_by_tag=yes

   Also add the following if you do need that:

   - use_private_ip = yes

   Give the user execution permissions with the following command:

   ```bash
   chmod +x azure_rm.py
   ```

4. As regards the inventory, we could very well stop there, but the problem is that we have to reconstitute an invetory
that contains the same group of hosts as our original static inventory. To ensure that our dynamic inventory can be used by our
playbook, we need to install nginx on all hosts in the webserver group and install MySQL on all host in the database group

To have a dynamic inventory that contains our web server and database groups, we will, in our inventories folder, creat a file called
book that will have the follwing conent

```bash
;init azure group to remove warning
[webserver:children]
role_webserver

[database:children]
role_database

[all:vars]
ansible_user=demobook11
ansible_password=xxxxxxx #if login to vm need password
```

5. Test the dynamic inventory. To do that we need to run the following command:

   ```bash
   ansible-inventory -i inventories/azure_rm.py --list
   ```

   To run that command in graph mode use the following command:

   ```bash
   ansible-inventory -i inventories/azure_rm.py --graph
   ```

   To check this dynamic inventory now run the following command:

   ```bash
   ansible-playbook -i inventories/ Playbook.yml --check --vault-password-file ~/.vault_pass.txt
   ```

   To use this dynamic inventory now run the following command:

   ```bash
   ansible-playbook -i inventories/ Playbook.yml --vault-password-file ~/.vault_pass.txt
   ```